Hi there.
This is Lou.
And welcome back.
Let's now begin with arithmetic operators.
And we already discussed them when learning about the absolute basics of the Java language in the previous
section.
And we also used a couple of them while demonstrating methods.
And of course, we also use them pretty frequently in our daily lives, like addition and subtraction.
Well, Java also uses familiar notations like plus and minus that we use in the real world.
There are also certain representations that are specific to Java and we will look at them in this lecture.
Java supports five arithmetic operations, addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and modulus
for addition.
A plus symbol is used and the example here shows addition of two literals and assigning the resulting
sum to the variable.
And there are also a couple of other ways in which a plus operator can be used.
One use is as a unit plus, which is used to just indicate that a number is positive.
Second, it can also be used in concatenating multiple strings.
That is joining multiple strings.
And we have been seeing such trend statements here.
Plus symbol is performing a concatenation operation.
It is concatenating the value of the variable name, which is on its right to the text username on the
left here user name and closed in double quotes is a string literal and we will discuss it in a subsequent
section when discussing strings.
The variable name here is of type string and string is also a class in Java.
Next for subtraction, a minus symbol is used.
Unlike plus and minus operator can also be additionally used as a unit operator.
In this case, it is a unity minus, which basically negates an expression.
For example, here, if X is minus five, then due to unity, minus the expression, minus x will return
a positive five.
Just note that unlike unity, minus unity plus does not change the sign of the expression.
That is, even if the operant is negative, the expression would still evaluate to a negative value.
So Unity Plus doesn't seem to have any real value.
My guess is it is only used to visually emphasize that a number is a positive number.
Next for multiplication, an asterisk is used for division.
A forward slash is used, and for modulus, a percentage symbol is used.
Modulus operation gives the remainder of division and here five more two for instance, results in a
value of one.
And one example use case of modulus is to detect whether a number is or even.
You would simply do a motto, and if the remainder is zero, then it means that the number in context
is an even number.
Otherwise, if the remainder is not zero, then it means it is an odd number.
So those are the arithmetic operations that Java supports.
And they are applicable to only primitive numeric types.
That is, they apply to all primitives except boolean.
Now.
Java also supports a few shorthand operators for performing arithmetic operations.
First one is a pre and post increment or decrement operators, and the second category of shorthand
operators are referred to as compound arithmetic assignment operators.
Pre and post operators are specific to only addition and subtraction.
And here are the notations.
And they're used for incrementing or incrementing a variable value by one plus plus would increment
by one and minus minus word decrement by one.
So x plus plus means the value of variable x is incremented by one.
Which is identical to this statement, X is equal to X plus one.
So it is a shorthand notation.
And in the next slide we will see what pre and post means.
While pre and post operators are specific to addition and subtraction, component operators apply to
all of the arithmetic operators.
And here are the notations for all the operators.
And here is an example.
This statement would increment the value of the variable X by five.
So it is same as this statement.
X is equal to x plus five.
Important thing here is that plus is followed by equal to symbol.
If you have equal to symbol followed by plus, then it will not work.
We will also soon test this out.
So x plus plus increments by exactly one.
While using such a compound operator, we can increment by any value and we can also perform similar
operations for the remaining four arithmetic operators.
Let's now see what pre and post operators actually do.
Let's consider a variable x which is initialized to five.
Post increment operator would look like this where plus plus follows the variable and this can be a
single statement and it would increment x to six.
And this is a pre increment operator where plus plus symbol is followed by the variable.
So plus plus symbol comes first.
And this can be a single statement by itself.
And this would also increment X to six.
So X was five.
And if we perform plus plus x, it would make x six.
So both are essentially performing an increment operation.
So what is pre and post then?
For that we need to consider either an assignment or a declaration statement.
For instance, let's consider this declaration statement where Y is initialized with X plus plus.
And this statement would first assign the current value of X to Y, and after that X would be incremented.
So once the statement is executed, Y would be five and X would be six.
Essentially it is identical to these two statements.
The current value of X is first assigned to Y and then X is incremented.
Now let's consider this declaration statement to understand pre increment operation.
This would first increment x and then the resulting value is assigned to Y.
That is x is first incremented to six and then that value six is assigned to Y.
So both X and Y would be six after this statement is executed.
So it is identical to these two statements compared to posts.
Just the order of operations is swept.
So premium price increment will happen first and then the assignment post implies assignment will happen
first, which is then followed by increment.
Post and payment will also work in the same way.
It is just that it would be decrement.
Here in why is equal to x minus minus implies Y is first assigned the current value of x, which is
five, and then after that x is incremented to four.
So that's suppose decrement.
And if you how and why is equal to minus minus x, then x is plus decrement to four and then that value
four is assigned to Y.
That is predictive.
Now let's just head over to my editor and test all of this.
And it would also be interesting to look at these pre and post operators in the context of.
So we will also look at that and we will also look at the compound arithmetic assignment operators.
So let's switch over to Ed now.
Here we are in the basics demo class in the main method.
So we are going to test three of them here.
And for each of the test we have a separate method.
So first we are going to look at pre and post and so we have this method called pre and post for that.
And then we are going to look at compound arithmetic assignment operators.
And finally we will also look at the modulus operator for this particular use case of testing, whether
a number is or even so, let's also test that.
So let's look at what we have in the pre and post.
Here it is.
So here we have this variable called X which is initialized to five and let's go ahead and just increment
it.
So let's have a post increment operator and we know that it increments.
Buy one.
So X.
Should be six now, and that's what we have.
So here it is.
So this is a statement by itself.
Now let's make it plus plus X so straightforward.
X is once again six.
Let's make it x minus minus post decrement.
Access for now.
So it was initially five.
Let's also do three decrement so that we will be done with that.
Sorry.
OC x is once again for.
Now let's look at previous post.
And for that we were using a declaration statement.
So we had something like this Y is equal to X plus plus.
And we know that the current value of X, which is five, would be assigned to Y, and then after that
X would be incremented, right?
So this is a nice, elegant way of doing it.
So here we are printing both Y and X and you can see that the plus symbol is being used as a concatenation.
So this is a string literal and string literals will be discussed later.
So we are using this plus to do a concatenation.
So the variable Y value would be concatenated to this string.
And after that, this string literal, which has comma and X will be appended to that string.
And finally, x value that the value of the variable x will also be appended.
So we'll have one full string here.
So we are using three plus symbols to build a string.
So let me compile and run it.
We are the screen.
Here you go.
So why is 5x6 all right now?
If you do plus plus six, then ex would be first incremented.
And then the current value of X is assigned to Y.
So both of them are six.
Now, if we do minus minus X.
Then both of them will be four.
Right.
X would be incremented first.
And then the resulting value will be assigned to.
Why?
Here you go, axis four and why is also four?
And let's also test the final one for the sake of completeness.
So why would be five now?
Because X will be assigned to Y the current value, and after that X will be incremented.
So Y will be five and X will be four in this case.
There you go.
So why is five exes for.
So that's with that.
Now, let's look at.
Pre and post in the context of it is slightly interesting here.
So let's also look at that.
So normally when we declare our we do this.
So let's have a variable.
Right.
And let's say the size is three here and we know that we can initialize it in this way of zero ten.
So this is one way of initializing the area where the index value is hardcoded.
But in certain scenarios, instead of hot coding the index values here, we can use a variable.
So sometimes you would have to do that and you would you cannot hard code in this way so you would be
forced to use a variable.
So let's do that.
For instance, we can define a variable called index.
Let's say zero here.
And we can have index here.
Och.
So that would be Audi of zero.
And next we need to increment index so we can do something like this index.
Plus.
And we would have the same index here because it means that index is one now because it got incremented
and we can increment it one more time so that we can increment it to two.
So we will have it like this and we can of course, if you want to, you can increment it one more time.
So this is what this is how a variable can be used.
Let's not worry about the context.
That will be clear when you when you look at the particular scenario.
But sometimes you would have to do that, especially when using something like a first statement or
a wild statement or in certain scenarios.
It will be it will be there.
But let's not worry about that.
So we have two statements here.
Now, instead of doing this having these two statements, just like in the case of the variable declaration
that we have seen earlier, we can also do this and we can remove this.
So in this case, what happens is first array of index, index is zero.
So array of zero will get the value ten.
And after that index will be incremented.
So index will be incremented to one.
So similarly, we also don't need this.
So at this point, index is already one.
So area of one will be 20 and then we will have this post increment.
So index will get incremented to two now.
And the same thing is here.
So first area of index will be assigned with the value on the right.
And after that the increment is performed.
So let's print index now.
We compile.
So here it is.
Index value is three.
Initially it was zero.
At this point it got incremented to one, then two.
Then after this, it gets incremented to three.
Now let's see what happens if we make it pre increment.
You can actually guess what happens.
So instead of post we are doing a pre increment here.
So index value here will get incremented to one.
So array of one will get the value of ten.
And so.
So increment is happening first like we already know because it is a pre increment operator.
So let's see the output.
Here it is.
We are getting an exception here.
We're getting an error because we are trying to access an index which is outside the boundary tree.
So over here the index was one.
So we add area of one, we are storing ten.
Then with this, the index value is two.
So we are storing area of two, which is 20.
And with this it will the index value will be three.
With that, we are outside the boundary of array because an array can store only three elements.
An array of three would reference the fourth element.
Right.
Because our indexing starts at zero.
So an array of index, an array of zero, we are actually storing the default value zero.
So in this case, to avoid that error, it has to be minus one and then it should be fine.
So in this case, it is fine.
That's it.
So that's what that.
Now the second thing.
As a compound arithmetic assignment.
So you would want to do something like this.
You would want to do something.
Use a post increment instead of or a pre increment.
But a lot of developers, you know, they just do a ray of index equal to ten and then they increment
in the next statement.
That is probably because of lack of knowledge about this.
But you now know that we can achieve the same thing using a post increment operator.
So that's with that.
Let's let's look at the next one now, which is the compound assignment operators.
So the code is already here.
X is initialized to 100 and we have these five compound arithmetic assignment operators.
We said that it can be used with all of the arithmetic operators.
So we are just printing here.
For instance, here we are incrementing by five on the same x, we are incrementing by five, so x got
incremented by five and the same x value which got incremented will be incremented here and we have
the similar notations.
So let's go ahead and just.
Execute and run it.
Here it is.
So X was initially 100.
Then we incremented by five.
So it became 105.
OC.
Here.
Then we are documenting this 105.
Bye bye file.
So once again, it becomes 100.
And then we are multiplying with five.
The 100 value.
The current value of X, which is 100, is being multiplied by five.
So we get 500.
And then we are applying this division operator on that value 500.
So we are getting 100.
And finally, we are doing 100 MOD five.
We get a reminder of zero.
So that's what it is.
So here you can see that although it is a print statement, we are able to execute this particular expression.
And to do that, we have to use this parenthesis.
And if you use a parenthesis, then it will execute it as an expression.
So that is possible.
So that's with that.
Now, I also mentioned that the notation here should be plus followed by equal to or minus followed
by equal to, but it shouldn't be equal to followed by plus or equal to followed by minus.
So you wouldn't get the same output.
So let's also test that.
So equal to plus would be would be same as this thing.
This is a unity plus.
So it gets it will be considered as x equal to plus five.
And for here, if you do this X equal to minus, it would be considered as x is equal to minus five.
So it's not performing the addition or subtraction operation.
So let's go ahead and.
Compile and run it.
Here it is.
So access no longer 105.
Here it is, just five.
And here it is, a unity minus.
So it X is getting assigned minus five.
Now, let's look at this one.
Actually, let me also add the modulus.
So while plus and minus here we for them we have unity and unity minus these actually give us compilation
errors.
So it's not even going to compile at least for this.
It is compiling and it is performing these operations.
But for this you end up with compilation errors.
There you go.
So it says that all three of the operations are invalid.
So it is not even possible to compile using star, forward, slash or modulus.
So that's the compound arithmetic assignment operators and this is just equivalent to X is equal to
X plus five.
Now let's look at the final one.
So it is very simple.
We are just invoking this method is or even so if you pass an even number, it would print a zero because
we are doing mod two and if you pass an odd number it would print one.
It would actually print something other than zero.
So let's get up.
Still getting the compilation error here.
So commenting it out.
So we are passing 50.
So it will print.
There you go.
It printed zero.
Now let's pass something like 51.
So I press one.
So that is an odd number.
So percentage symbol can be used for finding whether a number is odd or UN.
And there are also other ways to to detect that, to detect whether a number is or even but at least
modulus can be used for that.
So that's one use case of modulus.
So that's about it.
That's about arithmetic operators.
And next, we will look at some rules that are specific to arithmetic operator operators.
Thank you.
And I'll see you in the next lecture.